db/downloader: keep local snapshot data once the initial download is complete (#23350)
ledgerwatch/erigon: db/downloader/README.md

# Downloader Components

Main Properties:

```

> - if initialDownload complete: local `.torrent` are more important than remote. and local `.torrent` is more important than local `data-file`. If `data-file` exists without `.torrent` - then derivew `.torrent` from `data-file`      

Reviewer: `preveified.toml` on line 7, and `derivew` on line 6. The first misspells the filename this whole change keys on, so it will not grep.

The bare ``` fence at line 5 makes both bullets a code block: they render as literal monospace, not a list.

The first rule is contradicted by the code it documents. "local `.torrent` is more important than remote" is the opposite of what `localMetainfoUnbacked` does — the local metainfo is dropped with `SetNone()` (downloader.go:1152), the torrent is added under `preverifiedInfoHash`, and `addedFirstDownloader` fetches and applies the remote metainfo. The repair is against remote, not against the local `.torrent`.

The second half of that line is accurate as a general property: `Seed` -> `AddNewSeedableFile` -> `BuildTorrentIfNeed` does derive the `.torrent`, wired at node/components/storage/provider.go:168. It just does not hold on this diff's keep path, nor at startup for a pre-existing bare file, since `AddTorrentsFromDisk` skips non-`.torrent` entries. That is the TODO at :1177.

Both lines also carry trailing whitespace.

Author: Rewritten at ec87f511. Typos, trailing whitespace and the bare fence are gone — it renders as a list now.

The first rule was wrong, so it now says what the code does: the local `data-file` outranks the remote manifest, and a local `.torrent` with a different infohash is dropped (`SetNone()`), with only its sizes used to check the file. Repair is against remote, under the preverified hash.

The derive-from-`data-file` property moved out of the download rules into its own line naming `AddNewSeedableFile`, since it holds on the seeding path only.

> - initial download complete (`preverified.toml` on disk): the local `data-file` outranks the remote manifest and is never moved aside. A local `.torrent` with a different infohash is dropped, and only its sizes are used to check the file: on a mismatch the data backs neither manifest, so the download goes ahead under the preverified hash and the client hash-checks and repairs the file in place. Otherwise the preverified download is skipped.

Reviewer: Three statements in this bullet don't match the code.

1. "the client hash-checks and repairs the file in place" — it length-checks. Detail in the comment on `downloader.go:1172`.
2. "A local `.torrent` with a different infohash is dropped" — true of this path (`localMetainfo.SetNone()` at `downloader.go:1152`), but `addPreverifiedSnapshotForDownload` (`downloader.go:1073-1081`) returns earlier for an already-loaded torrent, keeping it and seeding under its hash — and `AddTorrentsFromDisk` loads any size-matching `.torrent` before either production caller issues a Download. So on normal startup the common path retains it and this bullet never applies.
3. "Otherwise the preverified download is skipped" — a missing `data-file` is still downloaded. `downloader.go:1167-1168` returns `download=true` on `!exists`, with no size comparison in that decision, and `TestDownloadsMissingSnapshotAfterInitialDownload` pins it. As written the README says a node with `preverified.toml` never re-fetches a preverified file unless a local `.torrent` disagrees, which would make a missing file unrecoverable.

```suggestion
- initial download complete (`preverified.toml` on disk): the local `data-file` outranks the remote manifest and is never moved aside. A missing `data-file` is still downloaded. A local `.torrent` with a different infohash is dropped on this path (`addPreverifiedSnapshotForDownload` retains one that is already loaded and seeds under its hash), and only its sizes are used to check the file: on a mismatch the data backs neither manifest, so the download goes ahead under the preverified hash and the client completes the file by length, re-fetching only if the length disagrees. Otherwise the preverified download is skipped.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim. Confirmed all three: `!exists` returns `download=true` at :1167-1168 with no size test (`TestDownloadsMissingSnapshotAfterInitialDownload` pins it), `addPreverifiedSnapshotForDownload:1073-1081` retains an already-loaded torrent, and the length-check point above.

> - initial download not complete: the remote manifest wins. Download `preverified.toml` and align the datadir to it (remote `.torrent` and `data-file`s); data of the wrong size is renamed to `.part` and re-fetched.

Reviewer: Two problems in this bullet.

"data of the wrong size is renamed to `.part`" — size is not what drives the rename. `prepareLocalDataForDownload` returns early with `download=true` only when the local `.torrent`'s infohash equals the preverified one (:1142-1143); everything else — no `.torrent`, unreadable `.torrent`, different infohash — falls through to `invalidateData` at :1183, which is the package's only `.part` producer and calls `os.Rename` unconditionally at :1034 with no size test. Conversely a file of the *wrong* size whose local `.torrent` matches the preverified hash returns at :1143 and is never renamed. `TestInvalidateDataWithStaleMetainfo` pins the counter-case exactly: `BuildTorrentIfNeed` makes the sizes match by construction, a different preverified hash is passed, and the file is still renamed.

This is the one rule a reader debugging the incident in the problem statement would consult — a correct-size snapshot that vanished to `.part` — and it currently tells them that can't have happened.

"Download `preverified.toml`" — it is never downloaded. `downloadercfg.SaveSnapshotHashes` writes it locally from `snapcfg.GetToml` (`downloadercfg.go:347-354`), called from `stage_snapshots.go:279` — writing it is what *ends* the incomplete phase. What's fetched remotely is the chain manifest, `<chain>.toml` / `chain.toml`.

```suggestion
- initial download not complete: the remote manifest wins. Fetch the chain manifest (`chain.toml`) and align the datadir to it (remote `.torrent` and `data-file`s); data whose local `.torrent` infohash does not match the preverified one — including data with no readable `.torrent` at all — is renamed to `.part` and re-fetched. `preverified.toml` is written locally once the set is complete, never downloaded.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim. `invalidateData` is the only `.part` producer and its `os.Rename` at :1034 has no size test; the sole early return is infohash equality at :1142-1143 — `TestInvalidateDataWithStaleMetainfo` is exactly the counter-case, sizes matching by construction and the file renamed anyway. And `SaveSnapshotHashes` writes `preverified.toml` from `snapcfg.GetToml`, so writing it is what ends the incomplete phase rather than something downloaded.
